FOLA: A Computer Algebra System for Doing Research, Teaching and Studying
Formal Languages, Grammars and Automata.

Dr. Quoc-Nam Tran, 
Department of Computer Science, 
Lamar University


Abstract

In this speech, I will talk about the use of Groebner bases and other symbolic
techniques in doing research and teaching theoretical computer science and vice
versa.

Formal languages, grammars, automata and related matters from the theory of
computation are of considerable importance in the field of computer science,
because they cover the foundations and basic principles of computer science.
The materials are also useful for important applications such as digital
design, programming languages and compilers.  However, for a long time
pencil-and-paper has been the most commonly used tool for working with the
subject, which makes the subject a very abstract one.  In recent years, efforts
have been made in order to develop computerized tools.

The goal of this project is to use symbolic techniques from computer algebra
for developing an easy-to-use, portable and efficient software which can be
used for both visualizing abstract theoretical models and for assisting the
manipulation of the models of computers and computation.  The system offers a
unified approach for working with both formal languages, grammars, automata and
related matters.  FOLA provides an environment that supports experimental
research on both formal languages, grammars, automata and related matters.  The
system does not have any restrictions on the alphabets, symbols, variables, the
number of internal states, the size of the tapes, etc.

From our experimental results, the system is efficient enough to support
serious applications.  FOLA can also be used not only as a visual tool but also
as a mathematical assistant for teaching and studying the subject.  Besides
supporting most of the basic operations on automata, grammars, regular
expressions and languages, FOLA will also support two- and three-dimensional
plottings and animations, which can be used for simulating the work of
theoretical models such as finite state automata, parsing trees or the more
complicated models such as two- and three-dimensional tape Turing machines.
Also, the users can easily modify or add new user-defined models and features
into the FOLA system.
