INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION for MATHEMATICS and COMPUTERS in SIMULATION

President:
        Robert Vichnevetsky
        Department of Computer Science
        Rutgers University
        Piscataway, NJ 08855 USA
Secretary General:
        R. Beauwens, Belgium

IMACS publishes the following journals:
        Mathematics and Computers in Simulation (Elsevier)
        Applied Numerical Mathematics           (Elsevier)
        Journal of Computational Acoustics      (World Scientific)

IMACS sponsors over ten international meetings a year.

IMACS has over 30 Technical Committees: for example,
        IMACS Technical Committee on SYMBOLIC Computing.

For more information, email: imacs@cs.rutgers.edu

In more detail:

IMACS is an international association of professionals and scientists concerned
with computers, computation and applied mathematics, in particular, as they
apply to the simulation of systems.  This includes numerical analysis,
mathematical modelling, approximation theory, computer hardware and software,
programming languages and compilers.  IMACS also concerns itself with the
general philosophy of scientific computation and applied mathematics, and with
their impact on society and on disciplinary and interdisciplinary research.

IMACS is one of the five international scientific associations (with IFAC,
IFORS, IFIP and IMEKO) represented in FIACC, the five international
organizations in the area of computers, automation, instrumentation and the
relevant branches of applied mathematics.  Of the five, IMACS (which changed
its name from AICA in 1976) is the oldest, having been founded in 1956.

IMACS organizes local and international scientific symposia and conferences,
and sponsors publications in its fields of interest.

Individual members of IMACS receive the ``News of IMACS'' and announcements of
IMACS events.  They benefit from reduced conference registration fees, and may
subscribe to the IMACS journals at prices well below the institution/library
prices.

Publications:  IMACS publishes 3 journals:

Mathematics and Computers in Simulation (published by Elsevier Science
Publishers, under the North-Holland imprint) is the main IMACS journal,
containing articles of general interest in modelling and simulation, a book
review section and the ``News of IMACS''.

Applied Numerical Mathematics (Published by Elsevier Science Publishers, under
the North-Holland imprint) publishes highly refereed articles at the forefront
of numerical computing.

The new Journal of Computational Acoustics (World Scientific) is devoted to
questions of computational wave propagation, large-scale computing and theory
in computational acoustics.


IMACS Secretariats:

American Pacific region:         European region:
  IMACS Secretariat                IMACS Secreteriat
  Department of Computer Science   Faculte des Sciences Appliquees
  Rutgers University               Universite Libre de Bruxelles
  Piscataway, NJ 08855             50 Avenue F.D. Roosevelt
  United States                    B-1050 Bruxelles
                                   Belgium
