        IMACS Conference on Applications of Computer Algebra*
                       May, 16-19, 1995
                       Tuesday - Friday
                   University of New Mexico
                 Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA

Conference Rationale:

In the past several years there has been a dramatic increase in the use
of computer algebra in engineering, science and education.  The
computer-algebra research community has made significant progress in
developing applicable algorithms, particularly in the areas of ordinary
and partial differential equations and systems of algebraic equations.
There are now textbooks for many engineering, science and mathematics
courses that use a computer algebra approach.  This international
conference will bring together these diverse groups for an exchange
of their latest ideas.

Topics Included:
     o  Solutions of ordinary and partial differential equations,
        including symmetry methods and differential algebras.
     o  The use of symbolic techniques for numerical computations.
     o  Applications of Grobner basis algorithms.
     o  The use of quantifier elimination algorithms to solve problems
        in engineering.
     o  The use of computer algebra in education, including precollege,
        college, and graduate education.
     o  Application of computer algebra to problems in engineering
        and science.

The conference will be run in the standard IMACS format where individuals
are invited to organize a special session.  Requests for proposals for
special session will also be issued.

For more information, please refer to the WWW (mosaic) page with URL:
        http://math.unm.edu/aca.html
This information is also available by anonymous FTP:
        ftp math.unm.edu
        Name: anonymous
        Password: <your email address>
        cd pub/aca
        ls
        get <any file you want, for example, long_description.txt>
You can also send email to the automated mail server at:
        aca-request@math.unm.edu
	Subject: help
As a last resort, FAX:
        1-505-277-5505

A list of email addresses for interested parties is being collected.  Please
either use the "Join the list of interested parties!" option in the WWW
(mosaic) interface or send email to aca@math.unm.edu if you would like to be
added to this list.

                     Local Organizing Committee:
           Stanly Steinberg    - Conference Chairperson
           Robert Vichnevetsky - President of IMACS
           Michael Wester      - Conference Coordinator

                 International Organizing Committee:
	Victor Edneral         - Moscow University
	Vladimir Gerdt         - Universite de Lille, France
	Robert Grossman	       - University of Illinois at Chicago, USA
	Herbert Melenk         - Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum, Germany
	H. Eric Nuttall        - University of New Mexico
	Richard L. Peskin      - Rutgers University
	Waldir L. Roque	       - UFRGS, Brazil
	Fritz Schwarz          - GMD, Germany
	David Wood             - University of Deleware, USA

Here is a list of the special sessions currently being organized:

                 Special Sessions

Education
	CAS in Engineering Education
	Computer Algebra Systems in Precollege and
		College Mathematics Education

Engineering and Technology
	Coding Theory and Computer Algebra
	Computer Algebra Applied to Technology
	Computer Algebra Methods in Control
	Quantifier Elimination and its Applications

Computer Science
	Computer Algebra and Automated Theorem Proving
	Parallel Computer Algebra
	Parametric Curves and Applications in Computer Aided Geometric Design
	Program Transformation

Mathematics
	Applied Computational Topology and Algebra

Differential Equations
	Construction and Applications of Normal Forms in the Theory of
		Nonlinear ODEs and Transfer Map Techniques
	Differential-Algebraic and Differential-Geometric
        	Elimination Algorithms for Systems of PDEs
	Numerical Methods for PDEs in a Computer Algebra Environment
	Symbolic Algorithms, Differential Algebra, and Differential Equations
	Symmetries and Closed Form Solutions of Differential Equations
	Symmetries and Partial Differential Equations

Probability
	Computer Algebra Applications of Stochastic Methods

Local Arrangements:

As soon as you register, a packet of detailed information will be
sent to you by:
        Sandbar Productions
        email: sandbar@math.unm.edu
        If you do not have access to email, then FAX or write:
                Sandbar Productions
                P.O. Box 3824
                Albuquerque, NM 87190
                Phone: 1-505-243-1344
                FAX:   1-505-268-5952
Blocks of hotel rooms and dorm rooms will be reserved with prices
ranging form $25-$75 per night.

To register, please use WWW (mosaic) to fill out the registration form
accessible from the ACA URL:
        http://math.unm.edu/aca.html
If you do not have access to WWW, then use anonymous FTP to obtain the form:
        ftp math.unm.edu
        Name: anonymous
        Password: <your email address>
        cd pub/aca
        get register.txt
Fill out the form and the email it to aca@math.unm.edu

Registration Fee (New Reduced):
        Members of IMACS
                On or before May 1, 1995 - $225 USA
                After        May 1, 1995 - $275 USA
        Non-members add $25

The registration fee was reduced on April 1 because we now have a better
estimate of the number of attendees and have consequently moved the
conference to smaller facilities (still on the University campus).
For those who have paid the higher fee already, refunds will be made
at the conference.

Registration fees can by paid by Visa, MasterCard, American Express or
Diners Club cards, institutional check, personal check, money order,
purchase order, wire transfer (all fees must be paid at point of origin)
and cash (on-site only please).  Make checks payable to ACA-IMACS.  Mail
payments to Sandbar Productions, P.O. Box 3824, Albuquerque, NM 87190.

Currently, this meeting is self-supporting.  Thus, each and every attendee
must pay the registration fee.  However, several proposals will be submitted
for support.  In the event any of these are funded, then the funds will be
used for students fellowships, to defray costs for session organizers,
and to assist with foreign travel.  The registration fee includes:
transportation between the meeting and the hotel, rental of meeting rooms,
audio visual equipment, refreshments for breaks, lunches each day, security, 
program, maps, advertising costs, etc.

Attendees will be responsible for their transportation to and from the
meeting, their hotel accommodations, and their morning and evening meals.


Location:

The conference will be held on the campus of the University of New Mexico
which is in Albuquerque, New Mexico.  Albuquerque is served by an
international airport.  Taxi and van service is available for travel
between the airport and the hotels.  Buses will be provided for travel between
the meeting and the hotels.

Note: The month of May is one of the best times to visit New Mexico and the
southwestern United States.  There are many tourist attractions.  Information
will be provided via WWW and by surface mail after you register.

Meeting Format:

The meeting will be run in the standard IMACS format where individuals are
invited to organize a special session.  YOU ARE INVITED TO SUBMIT A PROPOSAL
FOR A SPECIAL SESSION.  Paper submissions should be directed to the organizers
of an apropriate special session.  Additional information is available by WWW
(mosaic), ftp and email.

Duties of a Session Chairperson:

  [1]   Submit a proposal for a session to the organizing committee.
        This should consist of an abstract for the session and a list
        of speakers to be invited.  If the session is approved, then
        the following needs to be done:
  [2]   Invite the speakers.  Request that the speakers submit abstracts
        to the organizer.  The organizer will forward the abstracts to the
        conference organizing committee.
  [3]   It is suggested that the session organizer organize a dinner
        for the session speakers and, perhaps, some of the session
        participants.

The conference organizers request that senior special-session organizers
invite a junior researcher to be their co-organizer.  In addition, it is
important for the health of the computer algebra community to encourage junior,
female, and minority researchers to participate in the special sessions.

*partially supported by

Dean of Arts and Sciences, University of New Mexico
Dean of Research, University of New Mexico
Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Mexico
National Science Foundation
National Security Agency
Wolfram Research, Inc.
