Using Groebner Bases to Reverse-Engineer Biochemical Networks

Winfried Just [a,b] and Brandilyn Stigler [a]

[a] Mathematical Biosciences Institute
250 Mathematics Building
231 W 18th Ave.
Columbus, OH 43210
USA

[b] Department of Mathematics
Ohio University
Athens, OH 45701
USA

just@math.ohiou.edu
bstigler@math.ohio-state.edu


Biochemical networks often consist of n biochemicals, such as gene products or
metabolites that mutually regulate their changing concentration levels.
Current experimental techniques make it possible to collect data on
simultaneous concentration levels of all chemicals in networks where n may take
values in the thousands.  The task of reverse-engineering requires inferring
from these data a model of how the network regulates itself.  Since typically
the number of experiments is only in the tens, many different models fit the
data and the problem of model selection becomes critical.

Laubenbacher and Stigler [1] developed a reverse-engineering (LS) algorithm for
networks whose concentration levels have been discretized to elements of a
finite field.  The algorithm constructs all possible network models that are
consistent with the data and uses Groebner bases to select the most
parsimonious model.

In this talk, we will briefly review the LS algorithm and give estimates on how
much data are needed on average for the algorithm to converge to the correct
network model.  Since data collection for large biochemical networks is
expensive, minimizing the data requirements becomes an important practical
issue.  In particular, we will present a result showing that a recent
modification of the original algorithm is expected to need as few, and
sometimes fewer, data than alternative algorithms for which such bounds are
known.  We will also present a modification, which we have designed and
implemented, of the Buchberger-Moeller algorithm for computing Groebner bases
for zero-dimensional ideals of varieties of size m in a polynomial ring over n
variables.  Our algorithm has been optimized for the case m << n, which is the
typical situation encountered in analyzing data of m experiments on biochemical
networks with n chemicals.


Reference:

[1] Laubenbacher, R. and Stigler, B. (2004). A computational algebra approach
to reverse engineering of gene regulatory networks. J. Theor. Biol. 229,
523 - 537.
