Combining Logical and Algebraic Techniques for Natural Style Proving in
Elementary Analysis

Robert Vajda, Tudor Jebelean, Bruno Buchberger
Research Institute for Symbolic Computation,
Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria,
{buchberg, jebelean, rvajda}@risc.uni-linz.ac.at


Resolution based automatic theorem provers turned out to be successful in many
areas (classification of quasigroups, axiomatization of Boolean algebras,
etc.), but they certainly do not satisfy those requirements which originate
from application fields like mathematical education or program verification,
where typically a non-expert interacts with the proof assistant.  Human
readability and human-like inferencing is lost, when one uses only the
resolution rule for obtaining new clauses from a set of clauses.  The
alternative would be to use a system of 'natural deduction'.  The problem is
with the latter that although the sound inference rules are known, the
strategies in which order and in which combination the rules should be applied
are generally not well understood.  One promising way for improving the
capabilities of deduction systems of the second type is to apply a particular
strategy with combination of domain-specific decision methods which are based
on algebraic techniques [Shankar 2002].

PCS (Proving-Computing-Solving) [Buchberger 2001]  and S-Decomposition
[Jebelean 2001] are strategies for handling proof problems by combining logic
inference steps (e.g., modus ponens, Skolemization, instantiation) with
rewriting steps (application of definitions) and solving procedures based on
algebraic techniques (e.g., Groebner Bases, Cylindrical Algebraic
Decomposition).

If one formalizes the main notions of elementary analysis like continuity,
convergence, etc., usually a sequence of alternating quantifier blocks pops up
in the quantifier prefix of the corresponding formula.  This makes the proof
problems involving these notions not easy.  S-Decomposition strategy is
especially suitable for property-preserving problems like continuity of sum,
because it is designed for handling problems where the goal and the main
assumptions have a similar structure.  During proof deduction, existentially
quantified goals and universal assumptions are handled by introducing
metavariables, if no suitable ground instance is known in advance.  For
finalizing proof attempts, the metavariables should be instantiated in such a
way that they satisfy the cumulated algebraic constraints collected during the
proof attempt.  The instantiation problem is considered to be difficult in the
logical calculus.  Appropriate instances can be often found using quantifier
elimination (QE) over real closed fields.  In order to obtain witness terms we
utilize the QE method based on cylindrical algebraic decomposition (CAD)
[Collins 1975]. However, the QE method alone is not sufficient. One needs to
pre-process the (closed, quantified) conjectured formula and  post-process the
resulting CAD-structure after the call of the QE algorithm.

The steps of the pre-processing of input formula:

1) eliminating terms containing function symbols by introducing new variables
2) partitioning the quantifier prefix into alternating quantifier blocks
3) marking the existentially and universally quantified variables and
deleting the quantifiers in the outermost block

The steps of the post-processing of the CAD-structure after the QE call for
obtaining witness terms:

1) transforming the CAD into normal form
2) checking projection conditions
3) isolating the constraints for the originally existentially quantified
variables
4) choosing a sample value for each existential variable  satisfying the
constraints.

Our implementation is based on Theorema and Mathematica.  In the Mathematica
computer algebra system real quantifier elimination and cylindrical
decomposition is supported [Strzebonski 2002].


[Buchberger 2001]: B. Buchberger, The PCS Prover in Theorema. In: Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (LNCS) 2178, pp. 19-23, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2001.

[Colins 1975]: G. E. Collins, Quantifier Elimination for Real Closed Fields by
Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science
(LNCS) 33, pp. 134-183, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1975.

[Jebelean 2001]: T. Jebelean, Natural Proofs in Elementary Analysis by
S-Decomposition. Technical report no. 01-33 in RISC Report Series, University
of Linz, Austria.  November 2001.

[Strzebonski 2002]: A. Strzebonski, Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition Using
Validated Numerics. Paper presented at the ACA 2002 Session on
Symbolic-Numerical Methods in Computational Science, Volos, Greece.
