-------------------
(Notes: The name Fruhwirth is German, and there are two dots (an umlaut) over 
the "u"(&uuml;).  The name Regin is French, and there is an accent acute over 
the "e" (&eacute;).The mathematical notations "n" and "O(n^2)" should be in 
standard math.
------------------

Title:

A Computer Algebra package for Constraint Satisfaction Problems

Author:

Carl Devore

Affiliation:

Department of Mathematical Sciences,
University of Delaware,
Newark, DE 19716, USA


Abstract:

We present a Maple package for solving a class of Constraint Satisfaction
Problems (CSPs).  The Computer Algebra System allows for the easy specification
of symbolic constraints of arbitrary complexity.  Conjunctions and disjunctions
of constraints can be nested to arbitrary depths.  Constraints can be specified
as procedures which may return additional constraints.  Such procedures are
akin to the constraint handling rules discussed by Fruhwirth [2].  Constraints
and entire problem specifications can be programmatically generated.  Solutions
and partial solutions can be displayed graphically as they are being generated.
The package can display its internal workings at any level of detail that the
user wants.  Two consequences of these features are that (1) the package can be
used to analyze a small-scale version of a problem and to develop an efficient
solution technique before the real-scale version in encoded in another
language, and (2) the package can be used to teach logic, programming, and
computer algebra.  Several examples are shown of puzzle problems that are fun
and understandable at an elementary level.

The class of CSPs handled by the package is those problems that can be stated
in terms of finding an equivalence relation (ER) on a finite set (of size n)
where a partition of that set into systems of distinct representatives (SDRs)
of the equivalence classes can be initially specified.  Thus, every variable
has a constraint-of-difference in the sense of Regin [3].  We call this class
ER/SDR.  Several examples are used to show that ER/SDR is much larger than one
might at first suppose.  Specifically, the package is well-suited to solving
logic puzzles that appear in popular magazines.  These are typically problems
with a small number of variables, but they may have very complex constraints.

Three of the techniques commonly used in the solution of CSPs are
arc-consistency, constraint propagation, and search heuristics.  The ER format
allows the solution state to be represented as a single symmetric n x n
three-valued matrix plus a symbolic list of those constraints whose information
has not yet been fully incorporated into that matrix.  The ER/SDR format allows
the arc-consistency and a large portion of the constraint propagation to be
handled by efficient small-scale logical manipulations of the matrix.  The
search heuristic is akin to the traditional most-constrained-variable heuristic
and is achieved through very efficient O(n^2) numerical computations on the
whole matrix.

The constraint handling part of the package uses a traditional backtracking
search.  Variable assignments that lead to contradictions are pruned from the
search space.  The disjuncts of disjunctive constraints which lead to
contradictions are symbolically negated.  Unique solutions are proven unique by
checking that all other possibilities lead to contradictions.  The package
detects most problems that are severely under-constrained and stops with a
partial solution rather than continuing with an uninteresting and potentially
lengthy attempt to assign all variables.

The module construct of Maple allows several CSPs to be solved simultaneously,
each maintaining its own local variables.  This technique is very powerful when
the several problems are in fact the same problem with their constraints
specified in slightly different ways.  The interaction between the modules is
handled by special constraints called channeling constraints by Cheng, Lee, and
Wu [1].

While the current implementation only allows CSPs in class ER/SDR, the model
used for specifying the constraints and constraint handling rules can be
retained as the package is extended for more general CSPs.  Another planned
extension is the parallel processing of disjunctive constraints using Maple's
"process" package.


1. B.M.W. Cheng, J.H.M. Lee, and J.C.K. Wu, Speeding up constraint
propagation by redundant modeling, Proceedings of the Second
International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint
Programming, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1118,
Springer, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 1996, pp. 91-103.

2. Thom Fruhwirth, Theory and practice of constraint handling rules,
Special Issue on Constraint Logic Programming (P. Stuckey and K. Marriott,
eds.), Journal of Logic Programming, vol. 37(1-3), October 1998, pp.
95-138.

3. Jean-Charles Regin, A filtering algorithm for constraints of difference
in CSPs, Proceedings AAAI-94, Seattle, Washington, USA.
