	Coding Theory and Computer Algebra
	Igor Gachkov & Kenneth Hulth

Applications of the theories of Error-Correcting Codes have in recent
years risen tremendously.  Thus it is today hardly possible to imagine
engineers working with data transmission and related fields without
basic knowledge of coding/decoding of information. The possibilities
of quantifying information with electronic equipment is developing
rapidly, supplying the specialists working in communication theory with
more and more sophisticated methods for circuit realization of concrete
algorithms in Coding Theory.  During preceding years courses in Coding
Theory have been considered only for students on postgraduate level.
This is due to the complexity of the mathematical methods used in most
codes, such as results from abstract algebra including linear spaces
over Galois Fields. With the introduction of computers and computer
algebra the methods can be fairly well illustrated. The authors have
developed a course, Coding Theory in Mathematica, using the wide range
of capabilities of MATHEMATICA.  The course was given during the autumn
1994 at Jonkoping University, Sweden, on undergraduate level and with a
minimum of prerequisites. The hands on sessions were based on a package
of application programmes/algorithms, developed to illustrate the
mathematical constructions, used in coding theory to encode and decode
information.  We will in our seminar present some of our hands-on
material, used to construct Block Codes with means of algebraical
methods. We first present the basic concepts of coding theory, such as
hamming distance, generator and parity check matrices, binary linear
codes and group codes. We will then use some basic results from matrix
algebra and linear spaces to construct code words from the information
we want to send.  Due to noise in the channel of transmission the
received words may differ from the code words which was sent, and the
very aim of coding theory is to detect and correct possible errors.  In
the linear codes (the code words having group structure) the encoding
is accomplished by multiplying the information word (seen as a vector)
with a generator matrix, whereas the encoding process starts with
multiplication of the received word with the parity check matrix.
Within the cyclic codes it is preferable to work with generator and
parity check polynomials instead of matrices, and the code words here
form a polynomial ring.  With algebraic extensions of the field Zp by
irreducible (over Zp) polynomials, the final step is taken into the
BCH-codes, which have a rich algebraical structure.  The application
programmes in the package support the learning processes by
illustrating the algorithms in the mathematical constructions. The rich
variety of manipulations in the algebraical structures, the possibility
to vary the parameters used in concrete cases and the simplicity to
construct concrete codes with MATHEMATICA should strengthen the
understanding of the mathematical ideas used in coding theory.
