   Parametric Curves and Applications to Computer Aided Geometric Design 

            J. Rafael Sendra 
            Departamento de Matematicas 
            Universidad de Alcala
            Ap. Correos 20
            E28871 Alcala de Henares, Madrid (Spain) 
            Phone. 8854902
            Fax. 8854953
                 mtsendra@alcala.es


           Rational curves play an important role in the field of Computer 
          Aided Geometric Design. They arise in practical applications as 
          computer graphics, geometric modelling or manipulation of offset
          varieties.
            Recently, symbolic methods in Computer Algebra are been applied
          successefully to rational curves. In this session the most 
          relevant recent advances in the field of parametric curves and 
          their applications to Computer Aided Geometric Design will be 
          reported. 

Tentative list of speakers to be invited:

   - J.F. Canny
     Computer Science Division 
     University of California (USA)
     
    (Research activity in Computer Algebra, implicitization, polynomial 
     parametrizations, etc). 
 
   - R.T. Farouki 
     Department of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics
     University of Michigan (USA)

    (Research activity in  applications of Computer Algebra to algebraic 
     curves, offset curves, etc)


   - M. Hoij
     Department of Mathematics
     University of Nijmegen (The Netherlands)
      
     (Research activity in Computer Algebra and parametrizations)

   - C.M. Hoffmann
     Computer Science Department
     Purdue University (USA)

     (World leading expert in applications of rational curves to solid 
      modelling, offset surfaces, etc)

   - T. Recio 
     Departamento de Matematicas
     Universidad de Cantabria (Spain)

     (Wellknown expert in Computer Algebra, Robotics, and real 
      parametrizations of real curves)

    - T.W. Sederberg 
      Department of Civil Engineering 
      Birgham Young University (USA)

     (Wellknown expert and pioner in parametrizations and 
      reparametrizations)
 
    - F. Winkler 
      Risc-Linz
      Johannes Kepler Universitat (Austria)

     (Reserach  activity in Computer Algebra, rational parametrizations, 
      desing of algebraic software in Algebraic Geometry, etc)     
