Title:

   Quantum coupling coefficients seen as discrete wave functions

by Markus van Almsick
   Am Markuskreuz 6
   45133 Essen
   Germany
   (Applications Consultant of Wolfram Research Inc.)
   markus@wri.com

Work Shop:
   Stochastic Methods  (Michael Trott)

key words:
   application of CA to science, quantum mechanical probabilities, group theory.


Abstract:

Quantum mechanical coupling coefficients are conditional probabilities
between different symmetry eigenstates.

Computer algebra systems allow one to easily obtain quantum coupling
coefficients, in particular SU(2)-coupling coefficients. We review three
different ways to numerically, as well as symbolically, determine
Clebsch-Gordan-, 3j-, and 6j-coefficients. We will derive them

   recursively,
   via generating functions, and
   explicitly exploiting symmetry relations between coupling coefficients.

All three methods are suited for CA implementations. They incorporate a
wide range of CA techniques; optimizing recursion relations of difference
equations or putting generatingfunctionology to use. The possibilities to
extend these techniques to other symmetry groups besides SU(2) will be
discussed.

With these CA implementations of coupling coefficients we investigate their
properties. Coupling coefficients seen as functions of their magnetic or
angular quantum numbers can be interpreted as quantum mechanical
probability distributions.
We thus obtain "discrete wave functions" in the configuration space of the
vector model of angular momentum coupling.

The classical limit of these "wave functions" is given by the Wigner estimate.
Furthermore, the above vector model guides us in deriving and explaining
relations between 3j-coefficients, 6j-coefficients and rotation matrices.


Literature:

Semiclassical Limit of Racah Coefficients,
by G. Ponzano, T. Regge
in  Spectroscopic and group theoretical methods in physics,
North-Holland Publ.,
Amsterdam, 1968

Drehimpulse in der Quantenmechanik, by  A. Lindner
Teubner Studienbuecher (Physik),
Stuttgart 1984

Group Theory,
by  E.P. Wigner
Academic Press,
New York, 1959

Group Theory in Physics Vol. 1 + 2
(Techniques in Physics 7)
by J.F. Cornwell
Academic Press,
New York, 1984

Exact recursive evaluation of 3j- and 6j-coefficients for
quantum mechnical coupling of angular momenta
J. Math. Phys. Vol 11, no. 2, 1976
by K.J. Schulten  and  G.R. Gordon
North-Holland Publishing Company,
Amsterdam
