The Development of a Multimedia Symbolic Vector Analysis Package

Yuzita Yaacob, Stanly Steinberg and Michael J. Wester

Kulliyyah of Engineering, International Islamic University Malaysia
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA

Office of Biocomputing, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA

jujie_yuzita@hotmail.com

This talk discusses the process of developing a multimedia symbolic package in
the area of vector analysis that will specifically aid in enhancing the
existing packages and thus, make Computer Algebra Systems (CASs) more useful in
the advanced undergraduate calculus courses and for solving a wider range of
analysis problems.  By using this package, it is hoped that the user will be
able to enhance and develop his understanding in the area of vector analysis.
The active learning environment provided by this package will encourage
exploration, self-expression and a feeling of ownership by allowing the user to
manipulate its components and thus, make learning stimulating, engaging and
fun.  Moreover, the multimedia elements incorporated in the solution process
will help to reinforce a sensory rich environment and increase the user's
curiosity and interest in approaching problem solving.  The method used for
developing this package consists of three phases: preliminary research phase,
specification phase and implementation phase.  In the preliminary research
phase, we created a review table that consists of six well known CASs (i.e.,
Derive 6, Maple 9, Mathcad 11, Mathematica 5, MuPAD Pro 3.0 and REDUCE 3.8).
The goal of this table is to provide a benchmark for comparing the above
mentioned CASs in the area of vector analysis and multimedia capabilities.  The
outcome of this phase is a project plan which contains information about the
development of the package.  The next phase is the specification phase which is
based on the notion of Package Requirement Specifications (PRS) that has been
proposed by the National Bureau of Standards, IEEE (standard no: 830-1984) & US
Dept. of Defense.  PRS is produced at the culmination of the preliminary
research phase.  The outcome of this phase is a detailed description of the
design of the package.  Finally, in the implementation phase, the package will
be implemented and the outcome is the first version of the package.
