Introduction to Kinematics of Manipulators using Maple

Roman Hasek
hasek@pf.jcu.cz
Pedagogical faculty, University of South Bohemia
Ceske Budejovice, Czech Republic


Computer algebra systems (CAS) enable teachers to bring various real-world
problems into classrooms.  These programmes provide students and teachers with
means to develop symbolic representation of selected real-world problems, model
them graphically and solve them symbolically or numerically.  Such process,
closed with solution and a functional model, is in our opinion very beneficial
to develop true understanding of all utilized mathematical terms.

The paper aims to present several examples that are closely connected to
kinematics of serial robot-manipulators---forward and inverse kinematic
problems and a velocity problem.  We will see that kinematics of simple
mechanisms (at the beginning we can restrict ourselves to planar mechanisms)
represent real and attractive problems whose solving require mostly basic
knowledge of linear algebra, geometry, differential geometry and of methods of
solving systems of nonlinear algebraic equations.  Suitable utilization of CAS
relieves students of intricate computation and formulas manipulation and gives
them opportunity to concentrate on the basic facts.  Moreover the graphical and
programming tools of CAS enable us to build simple both planar and spatial
movable models of respective manipulators.

Some of the problems are introduced in courses of geometry and linear algebra
within the mathematics teacher training programmes at the Pedagogical faculty
of the University of South Bohemia. The forward kinematic problem serves as an
illustration of the connection between linear algebra and geometry,
particularly between matrices and geometric transformations. Examples
corresponding to the inverse kinematic problem are used as means of
introduction to the solving of systems of nonlinear equations.  More complex
problems are assigned as student projects in the subject ``Solving problems
using Maple'' which is one of those preparing students of teaching to use CAS
programmes in education.

The Pedagogical faculty of the University of South Bohemia educates teachers of
mathematics for both elementary and secondary schools.  Students of mathematics
teaching are familiarized with the CAS software Derive, Maple and Mathematica
during their study.  Each of these programs plays its unique role in the
teacher training.  The Derive 6 software in its Czech localization is, in our
opinion, the most convenient to adopt in the education of mathematics at
elementary and secondary schools. In 2004 we started with systematic
preparation, of both students of mathematics teaching and teachers of
mathematics, in using this software.  The Maple and Mathematica software is
mainly used to support the teaching and study of mathematical academic courses.
