Revolutionary Teaching, Learning and Assessment of Computer Algebra
with Computer Algebra

Dr Michael McCabe
Principal Lecturer / National Teaching Fellow
University of Portsmouth
Department of Mathematics
Lion Gate Building
Lion Terrace
PORTSMOUTH
Hampshire PO1 3HF UK
02392 846370

Teaching and learning with computer algebra systems is nothing new.  Assessment
with computer algebra is.  My paper will illustrate thiby charting the
evolution of a course unit, which has taught students to use Maple and Matlab
for problem solving, over the past 15 years.  It will emphasise the changes in
assessment, which have become possible through advances in technology and the
pedagogical benefits which they bring about.  In particular, I will explain how
MapleTA has been used to improve the learning, not just of mathematicians, but
also of computer scientists, civil engineers and biologists.

"Computer Packages in Mathematical Studies" is a course unit designed in the
mid-1990s mainly to promote mathematical problem solving using Maple computer
algebra.  In those days students submitted their solutions to problems ranging
from optimisation of airline fare pricing to wine glass design as completed
worksheets.  The problems for the lecturer ranged from plagiarism to extremely
time-consuming and inaccurate marking of submitted work.  Around 10 years ago
computer marked assessment was introduced using QuestionMark Perception.
Students were able to use CAS (Maple) to assist them in answering objective
questions, have their answers marked automatically and receive immediate
feedback.  The problems for the lecturer then ranged from an inability to ask
pedagogically sound questions with algebraic answers, mathematical diagrams,
e.g. graphs, to the generation of large question banks for formative (practice)
and summative (exam) delivery.

Over the past 3 years, MapleTA has replaced the older form of e-assessment.
Benefits of its introduction include:

 *  pedagogically sound mathematical questions with algebra and graphs
 *  better feedback and hints
 *  immediacy of on-line access through the university VLE (WebCT Vista)
 *  reusable assessment objects (McCabe, 2007)

One of the greatest benefits of MapleTA has been in the development of
"reusable assessment objects", automatically generated e-assessment questions
exploiting the use of random parameters (numeric, algebraic, graphic, symbolic
or text) and algorithms (typically conditions placed upon these parameters).
Reusable assessment objects motivate students by automatically providing a
huge bank of questions of a standard similar to their final exams and
immediate feedback on their progress.  Reusable assessment objects motivate
lecturers by eliminating the need to set a large number of similar questions!
Furthermore they promote "peer moderated assessment", by which students help to
improve the quality of question banks.

MapleTA and reusable assessment objects have now been extended from use with
mathematicians to computer scientists, civil engineers and biologists.  Recent
work in the development of reusable assessment objects for graph/network theory
will be used to illustrate how the new technology is revolutionising
mathematics education.  I will speculate on the future directions in this
revolution.
