LANGUAGES OF THE FAMILY ANALYTI FOR DECIDING OF SCIENTIFIC AND
ENGINEERING PROBLEMS

V.P. Klimenko, Yu.S. Fishman

Institute of mathematical machines and systems problems,
NAS of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine

klimenko@immsp.kiev.ua, tel. 044-266-70-54,
fishman@immsp.kiev.ua, tel. 044-227-20-98

In the beginning of sixties the group of the mathematicians and engineers led
by the academician V.M. Glushkov began to develop the series of the computers
for automation of scientific researches and designing MIR.  It is officially
computer intended for engineering accounts.  List of requirements to results of
this design contented the many general requirements to contemporary computers.
The main purpose of development was the raising of the productivity of the
user's working by the improvement of the artificial intelligence of the
computer~Rs source language ANALYTIC [1,2].

The artificial intelligence right away was understood as automation of the
possibly greater number of procedures usually being executed by hand in the
scientific and applied researches.  Thus symbolical computations should be
executed also automatically.  The transition to dialog mode was considered as
the forced deviation.  And although the computers of a series the MIR then had
the most perfect dialogue means (it is the display and the trace on the high
level language for the first time in USSR), the interactive mode was considered
basically as means for debugging of programs.  The computer~Rs MIR-2 source
language ANALYTIC had the effective system for recognizing of the functional
properties of subjects being expressed by formulae [4].  It enabled to create
many laconic programs and dialog systems.  Also it has been created one of
first the universal integrating program.  Under the contract with Finland has
been developed the software for solving of the problem by computer algebra.
Together with user's associations also had been developed the software for
solving of many urgent important problems.  There are calculating trajectories
of some space solids, various problems of the theoretical physics, automation
of the education on various disciplines saturated by mathematical models,
automation of the programs designing for lathers with the numerical programmed
driving and many others.

In sixties-eighties were been developed computers MIR-2, MIR-3, SM-1410,
ES-2680 that had the hard realization of the source languages.  There were
ANALYTIC, ANALYTIC-74, ANALYTIC-79 oriented to applying of the
numerical-analytical methods.  The realization of languages ANALYTIC in kind of
software for modern computers was begun in nineties.  Had been created
algorithmic languages ANALYTIC-89, ANALYTIC-91 and ANALYTIC-93.  New abilities
of computers and the language's realization permit to apply the ANALYTIC on
modern engineering problems.  Thus computer algebra system ANALYTIC has found
new mass user.  It is in the first place engineers that use the mathematical
modeling at the decision of various problems of the theories of elasticity,
composite materials, geometric designing and others [5,6,7,8].  These problems
have the following feature.  Expressions formed at the working have the huge
informative volume and visual analyses of it practically are impossible.
Abilities of ANALYTIC, the means for recognizing [3] first of all, enable to
execute all necessary numeric and symbolic transformations by automatic mode.
At present on base of the more thirty-year experience is developed the
computer~Rs algebra programming system with source language named
ANALYTIC-2000.

References

1. ANALYTIC  the language for describing of the computing
processes containing the analytical transformations Gluskov V.M.,~E,
Fishman Yu. S. et. al. Theory of automatic machines and methods of
the formalizing synthesis of  computers and systems: Preceding of the
seminar.  V. 1.  Kiev, 1968.  P. 3-105. (In Russ.).

2. General principles for developing of systems and interpretation of
languages oriented on scientific and engineering problems Klimenko V.P.
Cybernetics.  N. 1.  1990.  P. 49-56.(In Russ.).

3. ANALYTIC-93 Morozov A.A., Klimenko V.P., Fishman Yu.S. et. al. 
Cybernetics and system analysis.  N.5.  1995.  P.27-56. (In Russ.).

4. Basis procedures of the computer algebra Fishman Yu.S. Mathematical
machines and systems.  N. 2.  1997. ----

5. Klimenko V.P., Lyakhov A.L., Fishman Yu.S. Some properties of the
programming system ANALYTIC 4-th INTERNATIONAL MODELLING SCHOOL of
AMSE-UAPL. - Crimea, Alushta, Ukraine, September 10-15,1999.

6. Klimenko V.P., Fishman Yu.S., Goryk A.V., Lyakhov A.L., Piskunov
V.G. The programming of the solving of the engineering problems in
media of the programming system ANALYTIC The first international
conference by programming (UkyPROG-98). 2-4 September 1998. Ukraine,
Kiev. Cybernetic centre NSC of Ukraine. Preceding. P. 553-562.(In Russ.)

7. Klimenko V.P., Lyakhov A.L., Fishman Yu.S., Vinnikov Yu.L. Increasing of
the effectivity of the boundary element methods by compute algebraXVI
International conference Mathematical modeling in mechanic of the
deformed solids. Boundary and finite elements methods, St-Peterburg,
Russia, 23-26 June 1998.: Submit.  T. II.  St-Peterburg: Russia. OAO
LenNIIPROECT, 1998.  P. 75-76. (In Russ.).

8. Lyakhov A.L. Synthesis of the equation of the piece-smooth flat line
by computer algebra methods Mathematical machines and systems. 
1998. N. 1. P.32-37. (In Russ.).
