Gildas Besancon, LAG, ENSIEG, France (gildas@lag.ensieg.fr)

Title: Symbolic Computation Applied to Nonlinear Control Systems
       Analysis

Abstract: 
The control of industrial systems is based on mathematical
models which are often given by nonlinear state-space
representations. Many theoretical tools based on differential
geometry or differential algebra are now available to help
designing the controllers for such systems. But they involve
lots of non-numeric calculations not easily done  by hand which
make them of difficult practical use: typically matricial
manipulations, differentiations of nonlinear functions, solution
of algebraic or differential equations.  Nevertheless, these
calculations are to some extent well adapted to some symbolic
computation framework, and several results are now available in
this field of investigation (e.g. with Macsyma, with Maple, with
Mathematica). The main contributions are based on differential
geometric approach and concern the analysis of some structural
properties of the system such as {\it controllability and
observability }, and the solution of several standard control
problems such as {\it feedback linearization, noninteracting
control, disturbance decoupling,} etc. However the control
design is generally based on the assumption that all state
variables are available, which does not happen very often. The
estimation of the unmeasured states is the task of the observer,
which is an auxiliary dynamical system  whose inputs are those
of the system to be controlled together with its outputs, and
whose outputs are the estimated states.  There is no systematic
method to design observers for nonlinear systems. But the design
can be made easier if the system can be brought to some well
known one. That is why system equivalence (in the sense of
change of coordinates) has been investigated, and more
particularly equivalence to bilinear - or more generally state
affine - systems up to output injection.  Once again the
inspection of the conditions of such an equivalence is not an
easy task without any computer assistance. Even with symbolic
computing systems, a direct programming of the conditions would
require high performances, such as solving sets of nonlinear
equations. This motivated the special attention paid to this
problem, and an algorithm avoiding any symbolic limitation and
exactly answering the question of bilinearizability has been
proposed (\cite{Besancon94}). It appears to be a good
illustration of what can be done with symbolic computation in
the field of control and observation theory.
