+---------------------------------+
| IMPORTANT Guidelines for Chairs |
+---------------------------------+

Applications of Computer Algebra (ACA) meetings are cooperative affairs.
Unlike other conferences, ACA has no official bylaws or rules, but depends
solely on volunteers and the cooperation of the chairs (general, local,
program, session) that organize and ensure the smooth running of ACA meetings.
This paradigm has been very successful, but sometimes glitches do develop.
Here, we summarize some useful and important guidelines we strongly encourage
all conference chairs to follow that have been gleaned from years of experience
in running these meetings.

Setting Dates
-------------
When setting the dates for the meeting, the conference chair(s) should work
with the working group and other conference organizers to ensure that there is
no overlap with other major symbolic computation meetings.  In addition, if a
related conference is being held (relatively) nearby in the same approximate
time frame, it can be a good thing to try to coordinate the meetings so that
one follows the other by just a few days to allow people to go to both.

Conference Fees
---------------
The most convenient way to accept registration payments is via a major credit
card or PayPal.  This also makes it easy to refund a payment if a problem
develops.  The main disadvantage to doing this is that credit card payments
incur charges of a few extra percent (depending on how things were set up), so
the registration fees should reflect these extra costs.

It is also a very good idea to bundle costs (conference fee, banquet,
excursion(s), possibly accomodation, etc.).  For example, if an attendee pays
for the banquet as part of the registration fee, then he/she can claim it on
their expense account, but if paid for separately, then getting the money back
is more difficult.

Support
-------
The conference chair(s) should always be completely forthright and clear about
the financial situation for the conference, invited speakers, organizers, etc.
Confusion about money expectations is the number one source of problems in any
conference.  In the first ACA, we told people upfront that we were applying for
grants, but that we could make no guarantees about financial support and all
attendees should assume there would be none unless told otherwise (which we did
as promptly as possible when we learned that the grants were successful).

It should be made extremely clear whom to ask for financial support (generally,
the conference chair(s)) or that none is available or currently available.  The
main conference webpage is an excellent place to provide such information or a
very obvious pointer to such.  Doing this early (when the page is initially set
up, for example) will generally save everyone considerable grief.

Communication
-------------
It is also important that the chair(s) engage in timely communication,
especially near the time of the conference (certainly within 24 hours in the
couple of weeks preceding the meeting).  Frequently, last minute problems
arise in the period just before a conference begins and it is critical for the
chair(s) to respond promptly to problems.  Of course, it is important to
respond at other times too.  A helpful situation is to have one or more
co-chairs so if one person gets busy, someone else can respond.  A good way to
keep track of issues is then through a single email address that distributes to
all the appropriate chairs.

There also may be problems of a different sort: misunderstandings between the
chair(s) and participants.  Always be careful about making assumptions about
another person, as language misunderstandings, missing information, confusing
comments, etc. can all wreak havoc.  Although email and webpages can be
convenient and fast, they can also be one of the worst mediums of
communications if they are written poorly and/or are too long (people tend NOT
to fully read really long emails).  Do not rely SOLELY on email if an urgent
problem develops and email missives don't seem to be leading to a resolution
(or there is dead silence on one end).  However, well written webpages and
timely responses should take care of most situations.

Finally, write webpages and emails extremely clearly.  Do not assume too much.
Do not make it easy for someone to make an error as surely errors will happen.
In one conference, the general chair noted that fully 50% of the attendees made
errors on their registration forms!  Do not give people options that can be
easily abused.  It is a given that confusion and problems will occur, so
presenting information redundantly (especially on a website) and clearly
simplifies the lives of the chair(s).

Letters of Invitation
---------------------
Once a conference is announced, it is essential for some people to plan early.
People in certain countries often need official invitations, so they can apply
for visas and local funding sufficiently early.  It is incumbent upon the
chair(s) to provide these invitations in a timely manner, often many months
before the conference takes place.  We have provided a template for an
invitation letter on the ACA website.  We note that in previous meetings there
have been instances of people asking for visas that have had no intention of
attending the conference (especially from, but not limited to, central Africa),
therefore, the chair(s) do sometimes have to make a judgment call if they think
the person may be a false attendee.

Certificate of Attendance
-------------------------
Some people, in order to receive reimbursement, need a certificate of
attendance from the conference.  A good way to deal with this is to include
one in the participant's registration packet.  We have provided a template for
a simple attendance certificate on the ACA website.

Session Chairs
--------------
The session chairs are critical in making a conference an academic success.
It is important that conference chairs direct session chairs to determine
sufficiently early (a month or so before the conference) any scheduling
restrictions and audiovisual requirements of their speakers.  Also, session and
conference chairs must cooperate in ensuring that speakers are actually coming
by having the speakers register no later than several weeks before the
conference begins as schedules need to be made, food and refreshments ordered,
etc.  (This can also be encouraged by setting the registration fee to increase
at this time.)  In turn, once a session has been approved by the working group,
the conference chair may need to write letters of invitation for some of the
speakers as requested by session chairs.  These need to be done promptly (in a
few days) so that the speakers can obtain visas and support to attend the
meeting.

   Michael Wester (with suggestions from numerous folk)
