+--------------------------------------------------------+
| Some Applications of Computer Algebra (ACA) Traditions |
| as Written Down by Michael Wester and Stanly Steinberg |
|                                                        |
| Summer 2009                                            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+

After yet another successful ACA conference, we thought it would be a good time
to write down some of the ACA traditions and why there were established.

ACA is a semi-chaotic organization that survives on volunteerism and not being
overly encumbered by too many rules.  The primary mission of ACA conferences is
to foster interaction among a diverse group of developers and users in a
variety of disciplines.  Interaction can occur on many different levels at
once (technical, administrative, social) and all are important in establishing
relationships that will benefit the community, immediately and over time.  All
these levels should be taken into account when preparing a conference (high
quality talks, good conference organization, social activities).  However, we
also discourage formalizing too many specifics and prefer letting the
conference chairs decide how to best implement the above goals.

The conference chairs are the autocrats.  The ACA working group can advise (as
well as anyone who wishes to contact any member of the working group), but
whomever is the chair (or chairs) have final authority over how the conference
they are organizing is run.  This is only fair, because organizing is a huge
amount of work (but the rewards are great), so the chairs should not be
burdened by dilution of authority.  (Anyone who chairs a conference is a
bit crazy, either before or certainly afterwards!)  The hard work of the chairs
are appreciated by all who participate in the conference and any problems
should be _diplomatically_ discussed with them.

The ACA working group consists of former ACA conference chairs and other people
who have had a strong association with ACA conferences over the years.  The
working group both acts in an advisory capacity and helps with recruiting
special session organizers.  The chair of the working group acts to coordinate
overall ACA activities, but he or she is simply a first speaker, not an
authoritarian figure.  Respect and understanding for others' viewpoints and
abilities is the basis for cooperation (a sense of humor doesn't hurt, either),
and ACA and the working group is more than simply a collection of colleagues,
but people who generally like and respect each other.

ACA conferences have traditionally taken place in late spring/summer.  The
range of conference dates has run from May 16 to August 11 in the period
1995--2009.  The chairs should try to avoid conflicts with other major computer
algebra and related conferences.  They can also try to coordinate with other
major conferences (such as ISSAC) if they wish, but although there is certainly
crossover between meetings, ACA has a distinct crowd and perfect coordination
will not always be possible (or necessarily desirable).

There are no strict traditions of where an ACA conference may be held.
Sometimes, meetings have alternated between North America and Europe, but many
times they have not, and indeed, one conference has been held in Asia (so far).
Indeed, we encourage a variety of locales as this is a great way to experience
a diversity of local conditions for computer algebra and their many
applications as well as learning new things in general about the world we all
live in.

ACA conferences are composed of special sessions.  Special session organizers
propose sessions (the working group can voice its opinions at this stage),
collect together talks, and order them as they wish, all in coordination with
the conference chairs.  Talks are traditionally 1/2 hour in length (including
time for questions), although hour long expository lectures occasionally occur.
Session organizers should keep track of their speakers' audio-visual
requirements and attendance limitations, and pass on any relevant conference
news unless this is chore is taken up directly by the conference chairs.  The
final program has traditionally not been set until near the beginning of the
conference in order to give the chairs flexibility in producing a coherent
schedule,

ACA does not have a tradition of plenary speakers.  We do have a tradition of
hour long talks within a specific special session of an overview or more
general nature.  A conference chair can certainly invite one or more plenary
speakers, but in this case, it should be the chair who does the invitation.  We
note that some people think that plenary talks are a good idea and certainly
some ACAs have had plenary speakers (but many have not).

ACA finances are kept as open as possible.  Sometimes funding is available to
assist attendees (organizers and junior researchers have traditionally been
given preference to encourage their participation).  It is important to be as
open about this process as possible (for example, by listing it on the
conference webpage), however, chairs should not promise money unless it is
certain, and potential attendees should likewise not assume they will receive
funding.  Applying for grants (a traditional way to garner money) is a very
iffy business and often grant notifications will occur late and the grants may
impose strict requirements.  It is good to keep session chairs informed of how
ACA finances work as well to avoid any possible confusion.

Chairs sometimes have the duty of writing letters of invitation to help foreign
participants obtain visas.  Unfortunately, there are people that will abuse
this helpfulness and request a visa when they have absolutely no intent of
attending the conference, so it important that chairs believe that the
applicant really plans to come.

ACA Conference fees have never been excessively high.  Sometimes, there have
been special lower rates for students (which may not include some activities).
A standard idea to encourage early registration has been to raise the
conference fee for late enrollment (and sometimes raise it again for on-site
registration).

Conference publications have traditionally included collected talks from a
special session (perhaps over multiple years) published as a special issue of a
journal, although other ideas are certainly solicited.  ACA meetings
traditionally have not produced conference proceedings or books of abstracts,
although chairs are certainly welcome to produce either of these if they
desire.

   Stanly Steinberg, founder of the ACA conference series
   Michael Wester, co(n)-founder of the ACA conference series
