        IMACS Conference on Applications of Computer Algebra
                       May, 16-20, 1995
                       Tuesday - Friday
                   University of New Mexico
                 Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA

Conference Rationale:

In the past several years there has been a dramatic increase in the use
of computer algebra in engineering, science and education.  The
computer-algebra research community has made significant progress in
developing applicable algorithms, particularly in the areas of ordinary
and partial differential equations and systems of algebraic equations.
There are now textbooks for many engineering, science and mathematics
courses that use a computer algebra approach.  This international
conference will bring together these diverse groups for an exchange
of their latest ideas.

You are invited to propose a special session or to submit
a paper to the organizers of a special session.

Here are the special sessions currently being organized:

Education
	CAS in Engineering Education
	Computer Algebra Systems in Precollege and
		College Mathematics Education

Engineering and Technology
	Coding Theory and Computer Algebra
	Computer Algebra Applied to Technology
	Computer Algebra Methods in Control
	Quantifier Elimination and its Applications

Computer Science
	Computer Algebra and Automated Theorem Proving
	Parallel Computer Algebra
	Parametric Curves and Applications in Computer Aided Geometric Design
	Program Transformation

Mathematics
	Applied Computational Topology and Algebra

Differential Equations
	Construction and Applications of Normal Forms in the Theory of
		Nonlinear ODEs and Transfer Map Techniques
	Differential-Algebraic and Differential-Geometric
        	Elimination Algorithms for Systems of PDEs
	Numerical Methods for PDEs in a Computer Algebra Environment
	Symbolic Algorithms, Differential Algebra, and Differential Equations
	Symmetries and Closed Form Solutions of Differential Equations
	Symmetries and Partial Differential Equations

Probability
	Computer Algebra Applications of Stochastic Methods

For more information, please refer to the WWW (mosaic) page with URL:
        http://math.unm.edu/aca.html
This information is also available by anonymous FTP:
        ftp math.unm.edu
        Name: anonymous
        Password: <your email address>
        cd pub/aca
        ls
        get <any file you want, for example, long_description.txt>
You can also send email to the automated mail server at:
        aca-request@math.unm.edu
	Subject: help
As a last resort, FAX:
        1-505-277-5505

A list of email addresses for interested parties is being collected.  Please
either use the "Join the list of interested parties!" option in the WWW
(mosaic) interface or send email to aca@math.unm.edu if you would like to be
added to this list.

We will attempt to publish the proceedings as an electronic document.
If anyone knows of an electronic journal that would be interested in
working with us, please let us know.
