CONFERENCE PROGRAM

A preliminary conference program is now available via both the ACA WWW page and
anonymous FTP (as the files program.dvi and program.ps).  This program will be
kept up-to-date and a current version will be distributed to each conference
attendee when they register.  If you see any errors or problems, please alert
us as soon as possible (the best way is to send email to wester@math.unm.edu as
I am the one primarily responsible for the conference program).

DORMITORIES

The following was omitted from the previous announcement:

The dorm occupants should plan on purchasing breakfast and dinner at one of the
many restaurants on and around Central Avenue.  These are very near the meeting
site.  The Frontier Restaurant (directly south of the Student Union Building on
the corner of Central and Cornell) is open 24 hours and has good student style
New Mexican food (and famous sweetrolls).

COMPUTER AND INTERNET ACCESS

The Lobo Lab in the basement of the Student Union Building will be open from
8:30 am until 4:30 pm each weekday.  Conference attendees will be able to show
their badge and gain access to an Internet capable PC.  Further details will be
provided at the conference.

REGISTRATION

Contrary to the previous announcement, registration will begin on Tuesday
morning at 7:30 am (the first talks start at 8:30 am) and continue throughout
the day.  The Student Union Building will be unlocked at 7 am with early
morning coffee available on the Lobo Terrace (accessed via room 250-B on the
second floor) from 7 am-8 am.

SHUTTLING BETWEEN THE HOTELS AND UNM

Our van will shuttle between the hotels (Hilton Hotel, Fairfield Inn and the
Plaza Inn) and campus during the period 6:30 am--8:30 am each day and in the
opposite direction after the daily sessions (typically, 5 pm--6 pm).

BREAKS AND LUNCHES

Breaks on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday will on the Lobo Terrace on the second
floor of the Student Union Building.  Breaks on Thursday will be outside
Woodward Hall (or an indoor alternative if the weather is uncooperative).
All lunches will be in the Garden Court on the second floor of the Student
Union Building.

ACTIVITIES

More details will be made available at the conference, but this is what we are
thinking of trying to arrange:

A walk near the UNM campus led by Nicolas Robidoux during the one of the
lunch periods.

Tuesday evening:
	A sacrifice at the flying saucer landing pad.
Wednesday evening:
	A ride on the tramway to Sandia Crest (10,378 feet or 3163 meters),
	some walking around and dinner at the High Finance Restaurant.  The
	views from Sandia Crest are spectacular (the sunsets are especially
	nice) and it is a beautiful mountain area to walk around.  You may want
	to bring hiking shoes and definitely a jacket as it gets quite chilly
	once the sun has set.  The cost for a roundtrip on the tram (if you are
	eating at the restaurant) is $9.50 and dinner runs from $14--$33.
Thursday evening:
	A social gathering at Professor Steinberg's house.  We plan to have the
	van available for ferrying some people between hotels/dorms and his
	house as well as random cars.
Saturday:
	A hike somewhere???
