        IMACS Conference on Applications of Computer Algebra
                       May, 16-19, 1995
                       Tuesday - Friday
                   University of New Mexico
                 Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA

To submit a proposal, please fill in the Proposed Special Session
form available on WWW (mosaic) accessible through the ACA URL:
        http://math.unm.edu/aca.html
This information is also available by anonymous FTP:
        ftp math.unm.edu
        Name: anonymous
        Password: <your email address>
        cd pub/aca
        get propose_session.txt
You can also send email to:
        aca@math.unm.edu
As a last resort, FAX:
        1-505-277-5505


Special Sessions:

A special session will be allocated three hours for presentations.  It is
expected that most talks, including any time for questions or discussion,
will be for one-half hour so that attendees can move from one session to
another.  However, the organizers may use the time in anyway they wish. 
Having the first talk in the session be a survey or overview for a general
scientific and educational audience is encouraged.  It would be appropriate
for this talk to be for one hour.

Duties of a Session Chairperson:

  [1]   Submit a proposal for a session to the organizing committee.
        This should consist of an abstract for the session and a list
        of speakers to be invited.  If the session is approved, then
        the following needs to be done:
  [2]   Invite the speakers.  Request that the speakers submit abstracts
        to the organizer. The organizer will forward the abstracts to the
        conference organizing committee.
  [3]   It is suggested that the session organizer organize a dinner
        for the session speakers and, perhaps, some of the session
        participants.

The conference organizers request that senior special-session organizers 
invite a junior researcher to be their co-organizer. In addition, it is
important for the health of the computer algebra community to encourage
junior, female, and minority researchers to participate in the special sessions.
